---
layout: post
title: Story of the shot, part III
date: 2018-02-01 09:00:00
summary: The story behind one of my favourite photographs, of a holly blue butterfly.
tags: ["photography","gh5","story of the shot"]
visible: 0
---

This Story of the Shot post is a little different again. This time, I'll be
writing much more about the story behind the photo, and a little less about the
technique side. It's the story of a photo that I took quite a while ago now, in
the summer of 2010, of a little blue butterfly.

![Holly blue butterfly](/assets/story-of-the-shot-iii-2.jpg)

It's a really simple shot, and I really didn't have to do much editing at all on
it, but I think there's an interesting story around it. It was taken at St
Nicholas' Fields (St Nick's) in York, a local nature reserve, a short walk from
where we used to live.

I'll speak about my love of insects, about St Nick's and why it's such an
interesting place, then a bit about the shot itself, and some of my tips on
insect photography.

## Insects (and an aside on aphids)

Perhaps you don't know, but my first job after finishing my Ph.D., for which I
moved down to live in York, was a research project studying aphids (greenflies).
They have a really fascinating symbiosis with a special type of bacteria.

Skip this next part if you don't care about aphids (you monster!)

***

In the same way that you have a bunch of "good bacteria" that live in your
stomach and help you to metabolise food and keep everything in balance (a bunch
of different species), aphids rely upon one species of bacteria to help them
metabolise their food.

To cut a long story short (I just typed about five paragraphs and then deleted
them!), the bacteria are able to make essential amino acids for the aphids
because their diet of sugary plant sap has very few of them. Without these
bacteria, the aphids die, and they've formed this symbiosis over millions of
years of evolution. The really interesting part is that the bacteria can no
longer survive outside the aphids because they've lost all of the functions
that allow bacteria to live normally; they're now just little factories that
churn out essential amino acids for the aphids. A very similar thing happened
with humans, with a microorganism that became part of all of our cells--the
mitochondria--that produces energy for our cells.

It turns out that the same thing has happened in a bunch of other insects that
feed on restricted diets, like tsetse flies and human body lice that feed only
on blood. A fascinating bit of evolution! Aphids are cool for a number of other
reasons too - they can reproduce sexually (like we do) with a male and female
aphid or the females can produce clones of themselves asexually (without a
male). Aphids also tend to be specific to one type of plant, so you get a
species of aphid for most types of plant - the pea aphid, the soybean aphid,
the peach aphid, and so on!

I hope you have a new-found respect for the much-maligned aphid!

***

Butterflies are pretty fascinating too. In the UK, we have _loads_ of different
species of moth, many of them small and brown, some large and brown, and some
really beautiful ones that look much more exotic. We only have around fifty
different species of butterfly though, and most of them are pretty unique in
terms of size, colour, and character. Some are slow and graceful, others fast
and skittish, and they come in literally all the colours of the rainbow (and
sometimes all on the same butterfly!)

At St Nick's, where I took the photograph, I managed to spot about a dozen
different species of butterfly, as well as several moth species, a couple of
dragonfly species, and even a stag beetle!

## St Nicholas' Fields

As I said, St Nick's is a local nature reserve. It's just round the corner from
our old house in York, so I'd spend quite a bit of time dawdling around enjoying
nature, and photographing insects and wildflowers.

![St Nick's, leaves beginning to brown](/assets/story-of-the-shot-iii-1.jpg)

Before it was a local nature reserve, St Nick's was landfill; still is, I guess!
It was allowed to re-wild, and then turned into a space that people could enjoy.
There's now a visitor centre, run by the Friends of St Nicholas' Fields, with a
pond, gardens, and resources to learn about the nature reserve. The team there
also maintain the reserve, coppicing, cutting back hedgerows and grass, creating
new paths and spaces, and so on.

![St Nick's, pylon, black and white](/assets/story-of-the-shot-iii-4.jpg)

I've heard, although I'm not sure how true it is, that the copious apple trees
and blackberries are due to waste fruit pulp and seeds dumped there by
Rowntrees, who were based in York (now part of Nestl√©). The hedgerows and trees
provide the ideal habitat for butterflies - a mixture of shade and flowering
plants.
